further ado, I'm introducing Zeno uh who
is reverse engineering Bluetooth chips
to make better Bluetooth security tools
and classes. Take it away.
>> Thank you. All right. Hello everyone. I
have 145 slides, so I'm going to be
going a little fast. So, I'm Zeno. The
majority of my time is spent on my
nonprofit, Open Security Training, where
we create and give away free classes
that are the same high-quality classes
you would pay thousands of dollars for.
So, go take our free thousands of dollar
classes. 25% of my time I do consulting
and research, and that's just for
funsies. And that's also just a Trojan
horse to get things like open security
training in front of you to say that's
what I really care about, making
everyone better. So, Alex Zam, boom. All
of a sudden, these dongles can send
packets that architecturally in
Bluetooth specification, you are not
supposed to be able to have full control
of these packets. They don't want you to
send these packets, but I want you to.
So, that's what I made possible. So, how
you do that? Well, you go off and run a
couple of pseudocopy commands on your
Linux system or you run my install dark
firmware real.sh SH and therefore you
put a custom firmware onto the box and
then you plug in a USB dongle and that
is now running custom firmware. So it's
about as easy as I can make things on a
Linux box. So this is going to be
Magic's biggest secrets revealed. I
wanted to talk to you all about how this
worked and how I did it. But there's
what I wanted to teach you and there's
what I need to do with my limited time.
So what I wanted to present was like the
literal timeline of going through of
like here's how you start. Here's how
you look at things. Here's how you
overcome the obstacles. And I started
doing that. I started writing this talk
in that form. And I got to 350 slides.
And I said this is probably not going to
fit in 50 minutes. So I need to stop
redo. We're going to just focus instead
on a little bit of the suffering. And
we're going to emphasize for you that
suffering builds strength. I hope all of
you suffer in your lives because if you
don't, you're going to be weak. So go
out there and suffer to build your
strength and we're going to talk about
my suffering in this particular talk
because it was painful. So for this talk
we're going to have terminology of BT or
BTC or sorry BC or BTC Bluetooth classic
not Bitcoin. So Bluetooth classic that's
the original Bluetooth that circa 2001
Bluetooth low energy BLE that's the
updated version of Bluetooth circa 2014
13 somewhere around there and BD adder
BD adder is Bluetooth address that's
going to be mattering because some of my
goals are focused on BD adders so
Bluetooth low energy has four types of
BD adders the first one is called a
public address and this looks basically
the same as the MAC address that you
know and love from Ethernet And it
behaves the same way as the MAC address
you know and love from Ethernet. It's
got a IE organizationally unique
identifier 24 bits at the top six you
know three three bytes and that's going
to essentially tell you this has to do
with this company. So this will be Texas
Instruments or Realtech and then the
other lower 24 bits are going to be just
random values for any given device.
Now,
uh, for what it's worth, the Bluetooth
low energy public address will be
equivalent to a Bluetooth classic
address for the purposes of this talk.
Like, basically, Bluetooth low energy
has four address types. Bluetooth
classic only had one. And that has to do
with the idea that Bluetooth low energy
introduced the idea of we don't want
people to be trackable based on their
Bluetooth device addresses, which
they're spamming out all the time. And
consequently, Bluetooth low energy added
these sort of randomized addresses to
make you less trackable. But they still
have this old form that Bluetooth
classic used. Now what matters for the
purpose of this talk about BD adders is
that Bluetooth low energy it is easy to
spoof those addresses. If you think of
like Wi-Fi and what you have to do to
spoof addresses you know maybe it's easy
there Ethernet easy but specifically
architecturally it's easy. There is a
speced out way to change these three
type of addresses. Just send a official
command you get to change the address.
There is no speced out way to change
public addresses in Bluetooth low energy
or classic addresses in Bluetooth
classic which means that if you want to
do that you're going to have to do
something non-standard. So my motivation
for this talk I've got many motivations
and so the first motivation is that in
the future open security training
Bluetooth 1501 class that my wife
Veronica and I are working on. We want
to show machinein-the-middle attacks
specifically against Bluetooth and we
want to do that using WAD. WAD is the
wireless hacking toolkit that was
released a couple years ago at Defcon.
But again, there's no architectural way
to set public addresses. So if you want
a machine in the middle, a device that
is speaking with a Bluetooth low energy
public address or Bluetooth classic
address, then there's no official way to
do that. So these days, we use these
CSR4 dongles, and they're called CSR4
because one, they're using Cambridge
Silicon Radio, CSR silicon, and 4.0 0
because they have the Bluetooth 4.0 spec
is the only thing this silicon supports.
We are now as of August or something on
the Bluetooth 6 spec. So this is super
old spec which means it doesn't support
a bunch of packet types but yet
Bluetooth researchers ourselves included
because no one wants to go out and do
the work until today. No one wants to do
the work. So we're all stuck using old
garbage hardware. So 2010 is what we can
do in terms of packet types and that's
bad. So we want to teach Bluetooth spec
5.4 which is what we built our class
around. So we need to go out and find
some hardware that lets us send custom
packets for guaranteeing machine inthe
middle capabilities in the future. I
have an additional motivation for this
talk and that is that for the last
couple of years basically my wife
Veronica did a talk at Black Hat 2020
where she found overtheair arbitrary
code execution vulnerabilities in
Bluetooth for Texas Instruments and
Silicon Lab silicon. So send a magic
Bluetooth packet, get arbitrary code
execution in the silicon over the air.
So she did that in 2020, but basically
we couldn't make a big hairy deal about
it because we didn't know where all that
applied. We don't know which chips have
silicon labs, which which devices have
silicon labs, which devices have Texas
instruments. So, ever since then, I've
been doing this thing called Bluetooth
printing behind the scenes where I'm
running these sniffers and analyzers and
active fingerprintters, tooth printers,
where I'm sending out all this
information to your Bluetooth devices to
get more information about what kind of
hardware they have. So, I've been doing
that for a while. And there's one
particular tool I used as a part of
that. It's called Bracktoothoth. It's uh
some other public research tool that's
been created by academics and that can
send LMP. This is the lowest level link
manager protocol. The lowest level
Bluetooth classic packet type. It's a
type that you can send and receive
having nothing to do with pairing and
that highle stuff that you think of when
you think of Bluetooth or talking. I
need to put in a four-digit PIN code.
No, LMP packets are sent around down at
the lowest layers having nothing to do
with that sort of authentication. So
pre-authentication, potential
vulnerabilities, and uh data collection.
So I've been using BTO, but BrackTo I
don't want to say it sucks, but it is
suboptimal. It is sub-optimal in the
sense that at the time it was released,
it only supported like it is not open
source. It's still not open source. It
only supported x8664. So I had to run
these boxes that are like little mini
x86 boxes, which means it's high power
consumption. I have to throw a voltage
converter. It's not meant to run off
USB. It's meant to run off being plugged
into the wall. The box itself for Brack
is using an ES expressive uh dev board
that's big and fat. So sub-optimal.
Beyond that, the expressive dev board
that I have to use, you can't even buy
anymore. So, like officially supported
board, can't even buy it. Had to go find
new boards that still support Brack. But
this is the comparison here. This is
what I have to use today. This is what I
want to use. I just want to use a little
USB dongle. I want to have a discrete
antenna so that I'm not using a PCB
antenna with limited range and power and
everything else. So, like that's where
I'm trying to go for upgrades.
Furthermore, for Bluetooth printing and
like putting this out there for other
researchers to use. The espresso kit is
$55. That's comparatively expensive to
these cheap little USB dongles. Like you
can get them as cheap as like $4. I've
gotten them for $4, but then they don't
have the full antenna. So, let's call it
$15. I want to decrease the price for
people to work in this space. That means
not forcing you to buy a $300 x86 box,
and that means also using small, cheap
dongles. So, one of these things is not
like the other, and I don't like that.
And then finally, the motivation three
is leading by example. So basically, as
part of the Bluetooth printing class
that I've already published for open
security training, as part of the future
open security training class on
Bluetooth low energy, I'm trying to
trying to put together a crew. So anyone
who's interested in Bluetooth security
and hacking all of these thousands of
devices that are around us that you
don't see. Well, I'm putting together a
crew for people who want to do this. I'm
providing mentorship and guidance. And
this research is basically saying, "Dear
crew, here's how I reverse engineered
one particular chip. there are 20 other
silicon vendors that we need looking at.
Go forth, do the same thing, do another
talk. So, this is kind of guidance for
future talks. So, like let's see if that
zoom works. Oh, no. That's going to be
terrible. That that doesn't work. All
right. So, this is just to give you a
sense of open security training,
learning paths and stuff. We've got the
Bluetooth printing class already
published, but there's going to be
classes on Bluetooth low energy, and
then there'll also be classes on
Bluetooth packet crafting and classes on
vulnerability hunting, which tie into
our existing vulnerability hunting
classes. So, basically, you can learn
all sorts of awesome stuff in the
future, but it's time for me. So, talk
about the suffering and strength here.
Like, just a little hint of the
suffering here is the chip that I'm
looking at is going to be a MIP 16ebased
chip. It's not well supported by GIA.
have to work around that. There's no
public or private SDKs. I can't just go
off and look at example code that they
have. There's no good leaked
documentation to tell me about the
internals. There's no strings in the ROM
or almost no strings. There's just
enough strings to be helpful. There's no
JTAG option. Uh and yeah, basically I
have to end up, you know, want to run a
custom firmware, go off and handcode
some assembly, right?
So this research started about a year
ago where we had this notion that like
we're making a class using CSR dongles
is bad because it doesn't support the
latest and greatest packets. We need
something. We're going to need to
replace this at some point. So what I
did is I go to Amazon and I just go buy
some cheap USB dongles and that say
ostensively they support Bluetooth 5.3
5.4 in the general range for our actual
class teaching material. So they say
they support 5.4 for directly on the
box. But when you go and plug them into
Linux and you run HCI config- a what you
see is that Linux reports them as yes,
this is realtech, but no, this is not
5.3, not 5.4, this is 5.1. And indeed,
I've confirmed that with realtech
themselves. This particular silicon in
this particular dongle only supports
Bluetooth 5.1. Basically, there's a
whole bunch of like white label Chinese
uh dongle makers who are selling this
under false pretenses, just straight up
lying. So, they're saying this is the
latest and greatest version. I'm sure
they'll start saying 6.0 support soon.
So, like, you know, you have to figure
out what's going on here. We said that
the key thing is like all those cheap
dongles I bought off of Amazon, they are
all running real tech chips. So
essentially we can say someone somewhere
in the supply chain is widely
distributing. These must be really cheap
to to make things based on and spin up a
new white label thing. You know ZexMte
has disappeared now and there's a new
version of it. So I can't remember their
name. But the point is what I should
have done early in this research which I
didn't do until much later to take these
pictures is I should have cracked them
open and taken a better look at the
internals. So here we have one of them
that has the RTL 8761 BU and one of them
that's BUV. So, two equivalent things. I
really expected these to be true white
label and see the exact same circuit
board, but no, they were different
circuit boards and indeed different
chips. So, what I should have done was
crack it open. What I should have done
is go and read the specs carefully and
see, okay, the BUV and the BUE, these
both have USB interfaces, but there are
other two other things here, the BTE and
the BTV, and these have UART interfaces.
So, why that matters is around April, I
decided to get serious about this and
said, "Okay, I think I'm going to want
to look at realtech at some point in the
future. Let me go buy a dev board."
Because your best option always when
doing this kind of research is buy a dev
board. You can usually either directly
officially put on custom firmware or you
can use an SDK or something like that.
Now, that works for other chips which
are meant to run thirdparty code, but it
turns out these are not really meant to
run third-party code. These are just
meant to run real text code and
consequently they don't have that sort
of support. But still, I went out, I
bought a built board. It turned out to
be a BTV board. I got confused by the
fact that I'm sitting here looking at
this picture and saying, "Oh, it's got a
USB port on it. That must be the USB
dongle dev board that they're selling."
No, it wasn't. It turns out that has the
UART interface. This only interacts via
UART. They have a different USB board
off to the side that is the USB
interface one. So, if I had bought that,
then I could have like plugged it in and
interacted with it. Exactly the same as
USB dongles, but I bought the wrong
thing. So, first bit of suffering, do as
I say, not as I do. Make sure you always
double check the chips when you're
buying your dev boards. Like, yeah, just
do that. Okay, so the actual start of
this project didn't really start until
uh last July. Basically, when I was
running the Bluetooth printing class, I
don't have to spend my full time and
attention with the beta testers. I just
start the class, do a beta test, let
them ask questions, and behind the
scenes, I was like, "Okay, let's go
ahead and do this research now." So,
first thing I do tried to power on the
dev board finally in July and no dice.
It is not powering on. There is zero
interaction via USB. Zero interaction
over UART. So, at this point, I think
I'm being scammed and basically I'm
messaging the Alibaba sellers, which I
you only official place you could buy
these at the time was Alibaba. And I
think they're just scamming me in, you
know, stuff. I ping them and
they say, "Look, we're just shipping
whatever realtech gives to us. Take it
up with realtech." And indeed, it was
not their fault. It was real tech
shipping these things wrong. So, while
I'm waiting on this, like I ping real
tech, I ping Alibaba. While I'm looking
at this, the the next thing one might do
is one might look for firmware, like
where does firmware exist for this chip
and how can I go analyze that? Usually,
you might have firmware updates that are
downloadable components and you might go
off and look for those. Now, these were
nice because there is firmware just
baked into most any Linux distribution.
If the Linux distribution intends to use
Bluetooth USB and for the realtech, it's
going to be baked into /lib firmware
RTLBT. And then they've got one for the
B and the BU and that turns out to be
the UART and the USB interfaces. So,
this is the paths where they are in
Ubuntu 2404 and the same path at earlier
uh OS just without the Zstandard
compression.
So what I want to say at this point is
that then I did you know another thing
you as a researcher should do is survey
right don't reinvent the wheel go search
extensively for what has been done in
this space and you know build on any
existing research you do something new
and unique and novel don't reinvent the
wheel very important for people who are
going to do this for other chips so
there is no Bluetooth re realte tech
research like straight up zero research
whatsoever there is a little bit of real
tech Wi-Fi research. But when I say a
little bit, I want to say order of
magnitude like three talks maybe. Uh but
the thing is often times interestingly
Bluetooth and Wi-Fi cores, Bluetooth and
Wi-Fi chips will either be a single chip
that has like multiple cores inside of
it, one of which is doing Bluetooth, one
of which is Wi-Fi, or multiple chips
together. So Wi-Fi and Bluetooth are
joined at the hip, of course, because
they're both 2.4 GHz protocols, and
therefore they're going to be sharing
antennas. They're both speaking commonly
over the same 2.4 4 GHz antenna. They
have a notion of coexistence. Bluetooth
and Wi-Fi need to play nice with each
other. So, there's a person called 8-51
enthusiast who really likes looking at
chips based on 80 Intel 851. And he had
done some analysis of a realtech Wi-Fi
Bluetooth combo chip. The Wi-Fi side of
it was an 80-51. So, it was in scope for
him to go reverse engineer and find
that. But while he was there, he gave me
the barest of hints to say like he
looked at the Bluetooth core that was
off the side, didn't look like 80-51,
didn't really care, but he was thorough
and he said, "Okay, I see a repeating
pattern of 006 uh 65." And he thought,
"Okay, maybe the repeating pattern is
noops." And he did a bunch of analysis
that I don't have time to talk about to
basically say, "Yes, indeed, these are
NOOPS. These are used as padding for
different compilations and they are MIP
16e."
So that was the hint that I needed to
start doing something useful in gedra.
So myip 16e is a short form encoding of
MIPS just like thumb is to ARM. So thumb
is like 16- bit encoding uh for ARM.
This is 16- bit encoding of 32-bit MYIPS
instructions. Now that's a problem
because I don't know MIPS. Who here
knows MEIPS? All right, cool. We got
some people who do know MEIPS. Well, I
don't know MIPS. But look at what
happens when preparation meets
opportunity. So basically I got lucky
here because I know risk five because I
teach a risk 5 class at OSD2. I had no
reason to teach this class except to
force me to go learn risk 5 because I
thought it was cool and I thought it
would be something future interesting.
So I teach risk 5 and it turns out that
the op codes very significantly overlap
with risk 5. You can think of it like in
some sense MIPS is like risk three, you
know, basically there's a whole risk uh
family tree stretching back to Berkeley
and their risk uh architecture. And so
MIP is like risk 3ish type thing or risk
2, I don't know. Uh but risk 5 is of the
same genealogy and therefore the
instructions are basically the same. So
even if Gedrris decompiler didn't work,
which thankfully it did work, but even
if it didn't work, I could still at
least read the raw assembly. So this is
again just my avocation, my back door of
talking about open security training.
Basically, you know, you want to get
lucky, get prepared. You never know when
one of these classes that we're giving
you for free is going to be the thing
you need for your research. So even
though Gedra does disassembly for for
MIP 16e, it's not particularly well
supported. So now we have to start
working around some things. First of
all, you have to go off and select the
32-bit little Indian thing. And what I
hadn't noticed to start with there is
that it says MIP 16E as well. And so you
go there, you look at this start of this
file. This is the Linux file. This is
this Linux realtech Bluetooth firmware
sitting in the firmware some folder
somewhere in Linux. And you look at it,
you've got some header stuff. It says
realtech. I would zoom if I could. Let
me try that again if it doesn't. No, no
work. Oh yeah, and by the way, again, AV
people, get rid of the picturein
picture. Uh, then you have a bunch of
zeros. So, bunch of zeros, but within
this headerish type stuff, there is a
location that has like a 30 and a 3780,
which kind of are maybe thought of as
pointers. AV people, get rid of the
picturein picture, please.
Yes, it's going to cover up stuff in a
second that really matters.
>> Okay,
so you get a bunch of zeros. The zeros
ends at 30. And then here at 30, we now
have some non-zero stuff. And the
non-zero stuff is what we might assume
is going to be assembly. And so you do
what you normally do. You hit D, you
disassemble it, and you get a whole
bunch of nothing there. You get
instruction daddy. And so what you
actually have to do in in uh GEDAR is
you have to use F12 in order to
disassemble specifically as my 16e. And
then you're going to get a whole bunch
of valid code. And then you can hit F to
turn it into a function. But the problem
becomes be when you're encoding stuff in
16 bits, you can't possibly be
referencing like 32-bit addresses. And
so that means that functions that want
to like say there's an address of stuff
here. The instructions have to say no
actually there's like some data a little
bit later on and I want to reference
that data. So basically code followed
immediately by data and GRA didn't like
that and Gerra basically says I will do
one function worth of disassembly and
then I will stop because I don't know
point. So basically we get this
recurring pattern where code data
failure to disassemble, code data
failure to disassemble, right? So what
do you do? You file a GER ticket and you
you know now you play the waiting game.
But the waiting game sucks and so
instead I was going to have Veronica
make a script for me. So for anyone, you
know, out there in the audience who
doesn't want to go off and learn
scripting languages for ID or ge or
anything like that, I highly recommend
having a former NSA capability
development specialist in your house who
you can just throw work to as necessary
and say, can you please write me a
script so I can disassemble properly?
And indeed, she did that. And great, now
we've got like a whole bunch of
disassembled code that we can start
doing decompilation on as well. Great.
More disassembly, more better. But
there's no string still. And of course
we know that reverse engineers really
really want strings in order to make
sense of stuff and the absence of
strings does not bode well. So at this
point you start doing some open source
intelligence. You scrape all the real
tech documents for all the chips. Even
if they're not this chip, maybe they
give you a hint of something that's
useful. Um and so I download all the
possible software and eventually what I
did is I came to the conclusion that
this chip is using what are called
vendor specific commands in order to
interact with it firmware. So, this is
our big picture of like, you know,
here's everything. Oh, interesting. I
Oh, I didn't even know my mouse wasn't
showing up this far. Sorry about that.
That's going to be hard to deal with.
So, basically, this is our big old stack
of the entire Bluetooth thing. Now, we
have the host side and we have a
controller side. I want you to think
that the host is essentially Linux and
the controller is essentially the
Bluetooth chip. It's the realtech chip.
So, hosts are operating systems. They
don't need to be in different embedded
systems. They'll have different
architectures, but for our purposes,
let's assume it's Linux interacting with
a real tech chip. And so, basically how
Linux can do things normally is we're
going to merge like Linux supports both
Bluetooth low energy and Bluetooth
classic. So, that is the Linux host.
This particular real chip supports both
Bluetooth low energy and classic. That
need not necessarily be the case. Like
if you ever see a Nordic chip, Nordic
only supports low energy. They will not
support Bluetooth classic. So, Linux
normally will send what are called host
controller uh commands. So, host
controller interface commands. And so,
those are speced out in the Bluetooth
spec. And so, you can have things like
set random address. That's the thing
that I said is an official way for you
to spoof a random address and be able to
control the BDR of a dongle or a
Bluetooth classicy type thing like
inquiry. Inquiry is how you like
discover the other devices that are out
there. And so, the Bluetooth controller
knows these. The Bluetooth controller
has these low-level packets down here.
Now, I forget whether I say this
elsewhere in the talk, so I'm going to
just say it now. The key thing about
this host controller interface, it's
it's good and it's bad. It's good
because if you compare this
architecturally to other things like
Ethernet chips, Wi-Fi chips, stuff like
that, they have speced out an official
interface from the main x86 processor,
ARM processor down to the chip. There's
an official interface that chips can
inter um can can um implement the
particular commands and then this is
like abstracted away. So, that's nice.
There's an abstraction layer here
instead of being like vendor specific
interfaces using vendor specific kernel
drivers which is what you get in like
Wi-Fi Ethernet world. But what this
means for us as researchers who want to
control everything everywhere is that
the lowest level of the blue protocol
stack link layer control protocol and
link manager protocol and Bluetooth
classic. These are out of our control.
Like we can't fiddle with anything in
the operating system and send arbitrary
packets down at this layer. we have to
go fiddle down in the firm firmware
layer of a Bluetooth controller if we
want to take full control of these
packets.
So realtech then and all other vendors
they will have what are called vendor
specific commands that transit this host
controller interface and those can do
whatever they want. So anything custom
that they want to do any sort of
diagnostics any sort of information
collection any sort of firmware update
these are typically done still by a
vendor specific command. It's not like a
vendor specific kernel driver. It's now
just officially supported vendor
specific commands with have unofficially
you know whatever do whatever you want
kind of thing. So basically what we can
do by just observing what's going on on
this device is we can have a sense that
there's going to be some ROM there's
going to be some RAM and so any firmware
update must necessarily land in RAM. Uh
and consequently what we see by just
using the built-in what's called BTON
tool monitor tool. this built-in thing
for monitoring the the information
transiting the host controller
interface. We can see that they're
slicing up their firmware and they're
sending it down to the chip landing
presumably in RAM somewhere one little
253 byte fragment at a time using this
vendor specific command which has upcode
command field 20. So also I go back to
that picture for a second. There's the
firmware firmware and then there's also
a config file after it. So right there
at the very end, the orange stuff config
file uh is going to be tacked on the
end. So what are the config files? Well,
when we look at documentation for the
config files, we see that they control a
bunch of things like setting UART baud
rate and stuff like that. But the most
important thing to me is it allows
setting the BDR. So from the scraped
public documentation of all the other
chips, I know that realtech
architecturally uses config files to set
BD adders on other chips. I just used
their existing config files. They didn't
work on this chip. So I can't just use
it as is. But I now have a hint of where
I want to go if I want to spoof the BD
adder so that I can do the machine in
the middle of attacks so that I can
teach people about that in the OSD2
class. The format of those particular
we're going to call them packets
transiting from the host to the
controller is that you've got 10 bits at
the beginning of the packet which is the
op code command field. This is literally
just the command you want to do and then
you have six bits of the op code group
field. So there's going to be grouping
of different commands. the Bluetooth low
energy commands, some Bluetooth classic
commands. And so that's what grouping
means in this context. Now, that's super
annoying to look at because you've got a
106 split. So it's not just like 88 and
you can just read a bite. And so what
you have to think of when you're doing
reverse engineering, again, this is our
hints for future reverse engineers doing
Bluetooth reverse engineering of
firmware. What you have to think of is
that vendor specific commands always
have an op code group field of 3F.
That's just the reserved value for it.
And so 3F shifted up by 10 bits is going
to mean that we're going to have this 16
bit field as something that either
starts with FC, FD, FE, or FF.
Basically, just the most significant six
bits is equal to one. So those are the
things we keep our eyes out for as we're
reverse engineering things. If we see
3F, if we see FC through FF, if we see
shifts by 10 bits, this indicates that
we're looking at some set of code that's
like consuming on the controller side,
consuming these HCI commands.
So, always let the specification be your
guide because basically you need to use
things like specs in order to give
yourself hints when you're just looking
at a bunch of non-stringed out assembly.
So, uh, eventually on the 8th, uh,
sorry, on the August 1st, Real Tech
sends me some commands and PDF
instructions for how to start this
thing. Theoretically, I should have been
able to figure it out. Like literally, I
had started like using a continuity
tester and like just seeing what's
connected to what, but I really didn't
want to fry my boards and wait another 3
weeks to get them shipped from China.
So, basically, I waited and here you go.
There you go. It's not proprietary. They
should have shipped it this way. That's
how you power your own boards if you go
off and buy one of them. Great. It
powers on. Now what? I already said I
bought the wrong board. It doesn't do
anything over USB. It uses the UART
interface. So, we've got a UART
interface down here at the bottom of the
board. Hook that up to your USB to US to
UART adapter and then plug that in. Look
at it either on a logic analyzer. You
plug it in and it does nothing like a
USB dongle. And so okay, now you have to
throw it into a logic analyzer and it
also does nothing. And so where do you
go from here? Well, you keep doing your
open source intelligence, right? So you
just keep googling around, you know,
searching in hopefully not in vain for
information that can help you. So
amongst so that's what I was at. I was
basically just dead end. I don't know
what I can do with UART. So what I did
was I started poking around with the
various tools for other chips and that I
had uh scraped from real text public
information. There was one particular
tool called RF test tool which I could
see based on the UI had um had an
ability to connect to some compport. So
basically a UART port a serial port on
Windows connect to a compport and do
stuff. And some of the stuff is useful
stuff like reading the BD adder. That at
least tells me connect to UART to read
BD adder. That's probably doing
something via HCI, but that's an
official HCI thing that's not like a
vendor specific command. So I'm hunting
for vendor specific commands to do the
custom stuff. And there's a nice little
hidden menu. Not hidden hidden, but just
you enable this little BT menu right
there. And what you get from that is
this interface which has a thing called
BTRWREG which sounds like BT Bluetooth
read write registers type stuff. And
it's got like a thing called RF which we
might infer is like radio frequency
registers modem frequency BT sock aon
maybe Bluetooth uh system on a chip
always on power domain. So there's stuff
here we can play with and there's
addresses and there's reads and writes
right. So cool. I stick in addresses
like zero and I read and I write and I
see zeros. Here's where I would have
zoomed. But the zoom's not working
there. Actually, if I do this, does that
work? Oh, sweet. Okay, cool. So, a bunch
of zeros, a bunch of not useful, right?
That doesn't tell me that this tool does
anything useful on my system. So, a geer
hint at this point is that one of the
super useful things is this element
called defined data. So there is a
defined data window and we can see a
little bit of it right here. So I can
see a whole bunch of addresses that are
defined. The thing right here is that
Gija will show you in the assembly like
if it's blue that means it's a reference
to a data address that is within the
scope of the stuff I've got loaded in
Gerra right now. If it's red it's a
reference to a data address 8010 A02C
that is not within the scope. So
basically at this point in Gedra, I've
just got the firmware file from Linux
dumped into Gedra at offset zero. I
didn't try to offset it any. I don't
know where it should be offseted to, but
I can see based on the disassembly of
that that it looks like it's going to be
out there trying to I don't know load
load a word from offset zero or load a
word from that particular address. So
that gives me a hint that this firmware
is trying to read from that memory
address at some point and therefore that
should be a valid address if I can just
read from it. So go to the data
addresses just pick the last address in
that big area and then essentially use
the tool and we see something nonzero.
So that's great. Nonzero something means
the tool is doing something useful. If
it's just always returning zeros, I
think it's maybe the tool is not
working. But non-zero means it's
probably doing something. So next, what
I want to do is specifically or yeah,
then I have to like actually figure out
like which of these things matter and
which of these things may or may not be
like actually reading from memory versus
reading from registers as the name
implies.
And when I use that last one, what I see
is this reference to read flash FC61.
And that immediately looks great to me
because I told you earlier when we're
considering HCI commands, the bottom six
or sorry, the upper six bits of the 16
bit value are going to make it so that
we have FC's, FDs, FES, and FFS. So that
looks like something that might have to
do with a vendor specific command. It's
in the right range. But I also know that
this particular chip does not actually
have flash. Like it's just straight up
not having any flash. It's mostly
running from ROM. So consequently, uh I
have to figure out like well what is
this actually doing behind the scenes?
Now had I given you the 350 slide
version of this, this picture would make
more sense. In some sense, it's
unnecessarily complex right now. That is
like the Windows Bluetooth architecture
stack. You don't actually care about
that. All I want to say is real tech
tool running somewhere up in user space
has to talk somehow down to kernel space
to talk to a comp port. The compport is
plugged into my little USB to serial
adapter dongle which is hooked up over
UART to my dev board. But in the endame
I have to essentially connect this to a
logic analyzer as well to like actually
log what is the tool doing. This is what
I'm essentially getting at here. What is
this tool from realtech doing and how do
I figure it out? Right? I can go reverse
engineer the tool but I know where the
data is transiting. The data is
transiting this link to my board. So go
ahead and hook up a logic analyzer to
that as well. Route that into sale logic
analyzer. And now we can actually see
what's going on here. So when I run the
tool itself and I read from this
particular address, I get back this
particular data. So all ones and some
zero. And so this is why I needed the
zoom here because this is not going to
make sense otherwise. Here's my logic
analyzer trace. And what I'm seeing here
is the data going from the x86 out to
the realtech devboard. And so what I see
is the FC61 as bytes that are sent. And
so that tells me it's sending the same
thing it's printing out and it's
probably that vendor specific command.
Furthermore, I see four bytes saying
this is the address to read. I put that
into the tool and that's the same data
going out over the wire. And then I have
a 20 here which I don't know what it is,
but I eventually infer that that's the
number of bits to read essentially. So
it's reading hex 20 bits, four bytes.
It's reading four bytes worth of data.
And then if I look at so this is the
data going to the device. This is the
data coming back from the device. And if
I look at that then I can say
essentially okay exactly the data that
the tool at the high level is telling me
is coming back is what I see over the
wire. So great, I can now say this
device is sending vendor specific
commands FC61
the the read flash which on a device
that doesn't have flash but whatever
read flash is it's reading something
from the device and it's sending me back
some data and I know some places that I
might like to read because I've got a
blob of firmware stuff and I can see the
references in assembly that says it's
trying to read from 8010 blah blah blah.
So I know ranges that I potentially want
to read. I now have a capability to see
like what commands do I need to send to
read and now I can start like reading
those ranges. So again, super
abbreviated form. Now we're going to do
a game of map the memory like figure out
all of the RAM that is actually
accessible in here or ROM, right? We're
reading memory addresses. We don't know
if they're RAM or ROM. And so the nice
thing here is that the memory controller
read uh sends you back dead beef if it's
actually an invalid memory range. So we
can separate out like is it sending us
true zeros or is it sending us like
you're asking for something that's not
real go away. So you just create a
script that knows how to you know
basically talks to serial sends these
magic HCI bte sequences in the right
form that we just reverse engineered
from this from the logic analyzer and
you just scan all of the memory and you
also have to make an alias detector
because you see a bunch of stuff that is
similar. So basically like this is what
I come back with in terms of valid
range. And again that's why I don't want
the picturein picture. Please stop
putting it up there. All right. And so
basically when you analyze it what
you're going to see is if you read from
like all of the ranges everywhere you're
going to get some data that says it's
the same data. And you can just
automatically analyze that and say okay
the same thing is coming back at the
same 16 bytes. And you just try
everything and you dduplicate and you
come up with something that looks
roughly like this. We have what I'm
going to assume is going to be a ROM,
and we'll see why later. A ROM up at the
eight and all zeros. A RAM down at the 8
01 and all zeros. And these things are
alias. So the same ROM that shows up at
8 and all zeros also shows up at eight
and all zeros and so forth. And then
we've got some other ranges that I don't
even still really know what they are.
You know, future work, go do the reverse
engineering, but I assume they're memory
mapped IO ranges. They are not really,
you know, touched that much. So, okay, I
have now scraped all of the ROM. I have
put it into Gedra and I still don't see
any strings. So, basically, sorry, going
back here, you know, I can read all of
this. Everything everything that is, you
know, non-MPT here is a range that I
have now scraped out and I've stuck into
Gedra and told Gedra, you know,
disassemble it, you know, run Veronica's
script on it again. There's no strings,
but I'm an optimist. So I go ahead and I
do the manual string search and it
mostly gives me a whole bunch of junk
but within that junk uh there is
eventually some very promising things
and I want to say like out of the entire
ROM like this is all the strings like so
we've got you know seven strings
whatever that is but they are the
strings that are of my interest. These
are strings that are essentially saying
something about HCI commands something
about HCI events. Commands are what go
from the host to the controller. Events
are what come from the controller back
to the host. Something about LC, maybe
link controller, something about LMP.
Well, that's definitely of interest to
me. Link L manager protocol, lowest
level stuff. And some mailbox that I
still haven't explored either, which is
maybe interesting.
So, go ahead, make them strings. And
what do you do with those strings,
right? You check the cross references.
So, we've got a string like HCI command.
You check the cross references. that
string is used exactly, you know, two
places. You go there to where the
strings are actually used and you take a
closer look at that. And so what you see
here is a bunch of references to the
string HCI command, the string event,
the string LMP. So these are all the
interesting strings all compacted down
to a single function. That's nice. We've
got some other references. We've got
unique numbers on each of them. So the
different strings like three versus
seven versus four versus six. So maybe
it's like just like registering
something to deal with HCI events.
Registering something to deal with that.
Maybe, maybe not. I don't know. What I
do know is that basically these last
bits in green are going to be some sort
of pointer. So basically it's a data
address. It's a memory address. And so
inside this ROM code, presumed ROM code,
there's a reference to some data. So
let's follow one of those.
We follow a memory address like that.
Oops.
Yep. So basically, if you were to, this
is why I rely heavily on zoom. If you
were to take that particular address
8021B60,
you go look at that address, you see
another address. So it's a pointer to a
pointer. It's a double pointer. You see
another address and that address right
there 82002
E11, whatever. You go there and you find
that looks like it's actually some code.
So we've got a pointer to pointer to
code that has something to do with HCI
commands. And so we might infer that
this is maybe command processing. So we
might infer that, but we need some
evidence. And what our evidence is, you
know, obviously I can give you a bunch
more evidence, but what it comes down to
is one of the inputs to this function.
We can see it being referenced with
respect to is it three, is it not four,
is it 8, is it six, is it 3F. 3F again
was one of my like you know your eyes
should be blinking. 3F is the magic
vendor specific command thing. So I've
got a function that I think is HCI
command handling and I see it using 3F
probably the firmware function that
actually receives these vendor specific
commands and then oh hey there's a uh
function right there that goes along
with that. So if the input value is 3F
call this function. It's probably the
vendor specific command handling
function. But yeah, this is why we uh
always let the specification be our
guide because