I am Xenova. What you need to know about
me is that this particular work is work
I do with the minority of my time. The
majority of my time is spent on open
security training to a nonprofit I run
where I create free classes and give
them away. And I encourage other people
to create free classes and give them
away. So, this is not directly related
to free classes that are going to be
given away, except that it turns out I
created too much material. So, I'm
probably going to turn this whole thing
into a free class and give it away. All
right. So, Alakazam, boom. These
particular Bluetooth dongles can now
send arbitrary low-level packets that
they're architecturally not supposed to.
And there's your magic command pseudo
copy Zeno's magic firmware over the real
tech firmware. And you've got arbitrary
code execution. So, today we're going to
talk about magic's biggest secrets
revealed. Or at least that's what I
wanted to talk to you about. So, what I
wanted to present was not just what I
found, but how I found it so that other
people could follow in my footsteps and
do the same thing for other chips, cuz
there's a lot of chips that need
exploration. I made 350 slides and then
I decided that's not going to actually
fit in this talk. So, I cut it down to a
lean 140 and we're going to see what can
we get through. Now, the uh abstract
promised you that suffering builds
strength. That is one of my life
philosophies. You saw some of that
yesterday. Marius suffered for his uh
incorrect wiring on his glitching setup.
Uh Wayche, he suffered for being able to
only use uh core dump crash logs in
order to debug the MediaTek chips.
Suffering builds strength. That's 100%
true. And so I hope you understand when
I tell you that I hope you too will go
out and suffer so that you too can gain
the strength to do awesome work. So in
this talk terminology BC or BTC is going
to be Bluetooth classic not Bitcoin. BL
is Bluetooth low energy and BD adder is
a Bluetooth device address. It's that
thing that looks like a MAC address but
it's not a MAC address. What you need to
know about Bluetooth addresses is that
spoofing a Bluetooth classic address or
a Bluetooth low energy public address is
hard. There's no official way to do it.
And spoofing random addresses is easy
because there's official APIs that you
can just use. So motivation one for this
talk. This is why it's sort of OSD2
related, but Veronica and I wanted to
show machinein-the-middle attacks using
WAD wireless hacking framework in our
future open security training Bluetooth
low energy class. But there's no
architectural way, as I just said, to
set Bluetooth classic addresses or B
public addresses. So, WAD will help you
machine in the middle a device that's
using a random address, but it won't
help you machine in the middle a device
that's using public. So, if you want to
attack something using public, you need
to have some way to spoof the BDR. And
there's no good ways to do that except
that some really old chips like the CSR4
dongle have some really old deprecated
tools like a tool called Bei Adder from
Bluesy that just doesn't even come
included anymore. Those tools know how
to spoof the BD adders on those old
chips. But the CSR dongle is called the
CSR 4.0 for a reason. It only supports
Bluetooth spec 4.0 which is the very
very first one that supported Bluetooth
low energy. So great a new class. It can
do low energy, but this is only
supporting features from 2010. So we're
teaching a new class. We don't want
students to be locked into only 2010
stuff. So we need new hardware that we
can teach to that speaks to Bluetooth
5.4, which is what we teach in the
class. Secondary motivation, I have
Bluetooth printing. I presented it here
at hardware.io 2 years ago. And that
uses some security researchers tool
called Brack. Sorry, I'm going to like
even though I don't have time for it, I
got to give you a big mouse because then
you'll see what I'm actually pointing
at.
There you go.
That's going to actually matter later.
So, Bracktoothoth, uh, it uses that's
what I was using in Bluetooth printing
for LMP sending arbitrary Bluetooth
classic low-level link manager protocol
stuff, but the source code's not
available. That's not great. It also
only supported x86 when I initially
started the work. and it uses a big dev
board like this which forced me into
using a big x86 board instead of a small
little ARMbased single board computer
and then I had to use voltage adapters
to use big old honken power supplies and
everything. Another problem with using
brack sending low-level packets is that
it requires an ESP rover kit. You
literally can't even buy those anymore.
I had to go off and find what the
replacement is. Those cost $55 and
they're big and bulky. And I would
rather have people that I teach
Bluetooth printing or people actually
doing Bluetooth printing, I'd rather
have them use a simple USB dongle than a
big old dev kit. The third motivation
for this is that I'm putting together a
crew, a blue crew of people who want to
do awesome Bluetooth security research.
If that's you, get in touch. But
basically, I wanted to lead by example
for the blue crew, which is to say, I
wanted to go off reverse engineer
something. Say, here's how I did it. Now
you go off and reverse engineer Qualcomm
or MediaTek or any other thing that
hasn't been looked at because almost
everything hasn't been looked at.
There's like three or four chips out of
20 plus chips that have been looked at.
We need more people digging into this
stuff. So the future uh Bluetooth the
current Bluetooth printing class is
there on open security training.
Veronica and I are making more classes.
Blue crew members will be expected to
know all the stuff about Bluetooth that
we put out there and then they're
expected to go off and do cool things.
So, time for meat. So, what's on the
agenda? Suffering and strength. Right?
So, I don't want this to come off as
whiny. Hopefully, I'm not whining that,
oh, I suffered and it was hard. No,
suffering is good here. Suffering builds
strength. You got to break yourself down
a little bit to build yourself up a
little bit better. So, the types of
things I ran into is that this
particular chip was MIP 16e, and I don't
know MIPS. Uh, has no private or public
SDKs, has no strings really. There's
like 10 strings, but turns out those 10
strings are good enough. No J-tag
option, no live debugging, anything like
that, and end up having to write code in
an unfamiliar language. So started this
work back in last January with a plan
for a plan that someday we needed to
have better chips for our Bluetooth
classes. So I go off and buy a bunch of
dongles on Amazon, just some random
cheap stuff. And they say they support
5.3 and 5.4, before, but when you plug
them into Linux, run HCI command config-
A, look at the verbose output, it tells
you, okay, all the chips I bought turned
out to actually all be real tech stuff.
And you will see this. If you buy random
white label cheapo Bluetooth dongles, it
turns out most everything's using real
tech today. So, it's using real tech,
but the chips, according to themselves
report, they only support Bluetooth 5.1,
not 5.3, not 5.4 like the people are
putting. And I confirmed this later with
Realtech that yes, they only support
5.1. Those sellers are straight up
lying. So, I didn't know at the time, I
hadn't cracked these open at the time,
but if you got them, you crack them and
you find out that they're using realtech
uh 8761 BU or BUV. And actually, I I
show this picture just to say I really
expected all the white label stuff to
just be the same on this inside with
like a different plastic shell around
it. So, I was actually somewhat
surprised that we did see different PCBs
and different chips. So, then, you know,
had I actually went off and read the
data sheets, but I did that later on,
uh, the BUV is a USB interface, the BUE
is a USB interface, and turns out
there's two other chips that have UART
interfaces. So what I did that was
wrong, which caused me a little
suffering was that around April when I
started to think, okay, maybe I am going
to poke at these things at some point in
the future, I just Googled RTL 8761B
devboard and I went out and got the
wrong devboard. I said, okay, there's a
USB port and it's got the real tech
chip, so this must be the dev board for
playing with those USB dongles, right?
Wrong. So it turns out, like I just
said, there's a thing that uses a USB
interface and one that uses a UART
interface. So, this USB is actually only
for power. It doesn't actually speak
data over the USB. Do as I say, not as I
do. Double check your dev boards,
specifically the interfaces, because
there are different physical transports
that Bluetooth uses uh in order to speak
with chips. So, the actual start of the
project started this last uh July when I
got the Bluetooth printing class up in
Open Security Training. I'm running that
and in the background, I say, "Okay,
I've got a little free time. I don't
have to pay attention super much to the
students. They'll post questions
whenever they post. So I said, "Okay,
let's start looking at these real tech
chips in the background. Maybe we can
use these for the future." And so I plug
in the devboard. There's no lights.
There's no power. There's no indication
this thing actually works. So I messaged
the Alibaba sellers a little bit peeved
thinking that they've deceived me and
sold me some garbage. But they said,
"Look, we just ship whatever Realtech
gives us. You know, talk to Realte." And
I did. I sent off emails and heard back
from them later. But while I was waiting
to hear back from realtech, I go out on
my OS hunt osu uh int hunting uh to find
out what I can find about real tech
stuff and how it's used.
So if you look on Linux, you will find
that there is a lib firmware RTLBT and
RTL various other stuff, Wi-Fi and so
forth. But there's a Realtech Bluetooth
folder full of Realtech Bluetooth chip
firmwares of some sort. I don't know
what these are at this point, but they
say they're firmware. They're in a
firmware directory. So that's probably
some firmware.
So if furthermore, if you go off and do
your OS in and you do googling to find
out who's ever reverse engineered real
tech stuff, you will find a few hits for
Wi-Fi things. You will find zero hits
for Bluetooth things. So you know, wait
yesterday saying, "Oh, there's only
three things for MediaTek." I'm telling
you there's zero things for Bluetooth on
Realtech.
But 80-51 enthusiast, 80-51 enthusiast
that he is, was looking at some real
tech Wi-Fi chips, which happened to be
using 80-51based processors for their
Wi-Fi cores. And while he was looking at
that, he happened to just poke at the
Bluetooth that was also co-resident on
these chips. And what he found was that
there seemed to be a bunch of repeating
patterns of 006F. He did a little bit of
analysis and ultimately concluded he
thought that the 00 f uh 6f sorry 65 was
the noop instruction. So then he had to
correlate that back. What assembly
architecture uses 0065 for noops? And
the answer turned out to be myip 16e. So
just that little hint was enough to get
me going with those firmwares that I
found on Linux. So cool. They're
probably MIP 16E, which is a short form
encoding for MIP's 32-bit instructions
in the same way that thumb is a short
form encoding for ARM. But oh no, I
don't know MIPS, do I? Well, luck is
what happens when preparation meets
opportunity. Which is why I tell you all
to go out and take all those classes on
open security training, get lucky in the
future. Well, I got lucky because I
teach a class on risk 5 assembly for
OST2. takes you about 28 hours on
average, maybe more, maybe less. But the
op codes for MIPS significantly overlaps
with myip uh risk 5. Actually, you know,
they have they share sar similar
lineage. Mips in some sense you might
call risk 3 or risk 2 like it's just a
earlier uh anticedent of risk 5. So even
if graas decompiler didn't work, which
it did if I use x86, I could still
understand the assembly. And so again,
get prepared to get lucky by taking OST2
classes. I got lucky in this case. So
even though Gedra could disassemble
these, it didn't really work
particularly well. And so you throw it
into Gedra. You select MIPS. I didn't
even see this until I was making the
slide. It does say MIP 16E down there.
So that's the right thing to select.
[snorts] And then you find some header
information and you find a bunch of
zeros. But when eventually you get past
the bunch of zeros, you do what you
normally do. You select it. You hit D to
disassemble and you get invalid
instruction or at least it doesn't
continue on with valid instructions. So,
the right way to deal with this for all
of you future people who are going to
run out there and grab a real tech chip
is that you need to hit F12 to
disassemble as M.I.P. 16E. If you do
that, you get a whole bunch of assembly
instructions. That looks good. That's
great. Hit F to find a function, keep
running, and then immediately stop
because immediately after the assembly
is a bunch of data references, usually
in those small 16bit encodings of
assembly instructions, you can't put a
32-bit reference to a 32-bit memory
address. So, you got a bunch of data
references at the end that are
referenced from within the assembly. And
basically, GERA just doesn't like that.
Doesn't continue. It should just say
like code data. Okay, continue. It
doesn't. We keep trying. We assemble and
we keep running into problems. So what
do you do? You file a GEDRA issue and
then you play the waiting game, right?
[snorts] No, the waiting game sucks. So
let's have Veronica make us a Gedra
script instead. So I asked Veronica to
make a script. I've never bothered
learning IDA or GEDA scripting because I
have a reverse engineer in my house, a
former NSA engineer who may or may not
and cannot confirm or deny whether or
not she ever used Gedra before it was
public. So ask her to make a script for
you and basically uh you know easy mode.
Now we've got a whole bunch of assembly
for the firmware files but we still
don't know exactly what is contained
within the firmware. More assembly mo
bettera. Woohoo. And do there's still no
strings whatsoever. Okay. Well, we're
going to keep going. Go back to OSN. You
know I just always, you know, you go up,
you go down. This is a very important
thing in reverse engineering. Go deep,
go up, go broad. Go deep, go up, go
broad. So download all the documentation
I can find for any real tech chip. Don't
care whether it's my chip because
there's probably architectural
similarities between my chip and other
chips. So this is a diagram of the
Bluetooth stack for both Bluetooth low
energy and Bluetooth classic. But what
we care about for our purposes is that
Linux is a host that can speak both
Bluetooth low energy and Bluetooth
classic. And this real tech chip down
here at the bottom is a real tech chip.
Can speak both Bluetooth low energy and
Bluetooth classic. So how things
normally work with Bluetooth is that you
have a Linux host and it sends HCI host
controller interface packets across to
the host controller interface. Things
like official commands, set a random
address. That's why I said random
addresses are easy mode because anyone
can just say set a random address.
There's no equivalent for public
addresses, which is as a reminder what
I'm trying to figure out right now.
So they can send things like that. They
can send things down to classic side
saying inquiry like tell me what
Bluetooth classic stuff is out there
right now. But you can also have things
like a realtech driver running in the
background sending magic vendor specific
commands. So vendor specific commands
are officially speced out as having a
special number 3F for the group and then
whatever the vendor wants for the actual
command. In this case 20 for some sort
of vendor download, vendor firmware
download type thing. So what I can see
by just like plugging in a real tech
dongle and using something like BTON is
that it's sending VSC OCF that's op code
uh op code command field OCF just
command 20 20 2020 20 it's sending
fragments of those firmware files that
are sitting on the Linux file system
also followed by a configuration file
that's sitting on the file system. So
you can confirm that for yourself. You
just run bmon within Linux, attach a
dongle, and you'll see a whole bunch of
these vendor specific commands. So those
config files are interesting because
they're sitting right next to all the
firmware files and leaked documentation
indicates that they do have the
capability to set the beader. This is
how real tech allows people to set the
biotterer except for this particular
chip. It's not the leaked documents have
the exact way to configure this, but it
doesn't work on this chip. So, it turns
out like something about the format of
the config file is different for this
chip than the leak documents.
Got to talk a little bit like I'm only
talking about this to give like the hint
that like anyone anywhere that ever
wants to do Bluetooth reverse
engineering, if you're going to reverse
engineer the Bluetooth controller
itself, you need to let the
specification be your guide. So, the
format of those HCI commands, the
special commands going down from the
realtech driver. when it's using a
vendor specific command. The least
significant 16 bits are broken up
annoyingly into a six- bit field and a
10- bit field. So the six- bit field is
the op code group field. The 10- bit
field is the actual command. And so when
you're looking at this, the 3F that is
mandatory for vendor specific commands
must be shifted up by 10. And therefore,
if you see any constants like this, then
those are kind of going to be your hint
when you're reverse engineering. If you
see 3F, if you see those constants that
are 16 bit, FC, FD, FE, FF, if you see
shift by 10, these are the kind of hints
to you somewhere, excuse me, somewhere
in the code, there is uh some vendor
specific command processing going on.
So always let the specification be your
guide. You need to use the hints that
the spec gives you about magic numbers
and things that must be in order to do
the reverse engineering. [gasps] So now
finally 801 we have some instructions
from realtech about how to turn on that
dev board that was shipped in a state
that cannot actually power on. Here's
the jumpers you set. Just including that
for posterity. They sent it in a
confidential document to a person who
has no NDA. So there you go. Should have
really shipped that way, right? Don't
waste my time. All right. Anyways, uh so
what do you do when you can power on
your board? Well, this particular board,
as I said, is the wrong board. it is
using the UART interface. So what you
have to do is you have to connect up to
the UART, plug in like a USB to UART
adapter, plug it in, run screen or what
have you in order to see the serial
output and you see a whole bunch of
nothing. And then you debug it with
something like a logic analyzer and what
do you see? You see a whole bunch of
nothing. So my devboard is doing all of
nothing when I power it on. So back to
OSIN and just running around fiddling
around. But the most useful discovery of
this research occurred on 803 when I was
looking at tools a particular tool RF
test tool which is just a Windows tool
for other devices not for this
particular chip but it did have an
interface which requested a compport a
serial port in Windows parlance and that
particular tool had capabilities like
read the BD adder so I could see this
tool I actually got it working on this
chip and it can read the BD adder that's
the true beady adder so I this tool
interfaces with this chip. Fine. What I
need to figure out now is how does this
chip how does this tool work, right? I
need to sort of reverse engineer the
tool, but I want to do a more dynamic
analysis rather than static analysis if
at all humanly possible. The most useful
thing being that there was this function
rwreg bt. And if you pulled up that
background command uh uh menu bar, you
got this new tab appearing. And this new
tab had these things like btrwg. Well,
we might infer that that means Bluetooth
readr register of some sort. It's got RF
registers, modem registers. BTOC AON
probably stands for system on a chip
always on uh domain of power. So there's
a thing, we connect it and we try out
some stuff. We try a bunch of different
addresses and we get all zeros. We would
call that inconclusive, right? I don't
know whether this is actually doing
anything useful at this point. I can
read and it seems like it's doing
something, but it's sending me zeros.
That's not useful. So Ger tip of the day
is that when you want to find out where
you should potentially be reading to an
address that might be truly valid, then
you go to the defined data and you
scroll through that. And what you're
seeing here is that there's a whole
bunch of stuff in the range 80
something. And you can actually see over
in this assembly at offset 30, like
literally the very first assembly, you
can see that it'll have in blue
addresses which are defined within the
context of the blob of data that I've
included right now. And there's
addresses which are not defined within
the context of the blob of data. So I've
just allowed this to be located at
offset zero. And it's telling you, well,
I'm off I'm at offset zero. I've only
got hex 4000 worth of firmware data, but
some sort of access is going on to
address 8010 blah blah blah. So stuff up
in the 80 range seems to be accessed by
this firmware. Don't know what it is,
but I want to go try to read that
instead. So run down to the last defined
data. I can see it's accessed from many
different places in the assembly code
that I've already loaded. Go ahead and
do that. Throw that into the tool and
boom, we get some nonzero values. That's
what I want to see. That's saying
something interesting is going on here.
And move on to try all the other types.
Get some non-zero values for that other
type as well. But also get this nice
little hint here. We've got a quote
unquote read flash. And it is at some
sort of FC61.
Well, to me that now looks like a vendor
specific command. I said be on the
lookout for 3F shifted up by 10 bits and
those are what are vendor specific
commands. So this looks like vener
specific command number 61 to me at this
point. Only problem being that this
particular chip definitely does not have
flash. So it is just running from ROM
with some ephemeral RAM and information
sent into it. Okay. Well, so now I want
to figure out like what is the tool
doing behind the scenes? You're not
supposed to understand this diagram.
That's just the Windows architectural
Bluetooth diagram grabbed from some
Microsoft site. But the basic point is
I've got some real tech tool I found and
it sends some sort of magic command down
to my chip somehow through the Bluetooth
stack andor through the serial stack
lands down here at my serial adapter
sends over to the board via you know
serial the HCI data. But to figure out
what's really going on there, I'm going
to hook up the sale logic analyzer and
just read the same wires that are being
sent off to the devboard. And then I can
infer or not infer, just literally see
what's going on with this tool. So send
a magic command here. It says it's
reading flash. What's going on behind
the scenes? Let's look at like what kind
of data we expect back, what sort of
data we put in. So there's your diagram,
but thankfully for you, I like to zoom.
So we can see in the serial trace that
it is indeed sending some sort of data
like FC61. So that looks like a vendor
specific command. We can see in the
serial trace that it's sending something
that looks like the address that I
requested to read 80 12 DC50. We can see
a 20 which because we know four bytes of
data come back that's probably a 32-bit
x20 32 32 bits worth of data to read and
that five is probably just the length of
this data right here. So, that looks
like some sort of read from a 32-bit
address of four bytes of data. And
indeed, I see the full four bytes of
data coming back here. So, cool. At this
point, I think I've got a special magic
command. I think it reads I don't know
100%. Does it read from like some offset
in memory that it thinks is where flash
starts? Does it read from the base of
memory? I don't know. That turns out the
answer is it reads from the base of
memory. So, you're just giving an
address and you get to request anywhere
within the 32-bit address space. So,
what do you do with that? Well, you just
try to scan all of memory, right? And
you don't want to scan every single bite
of memory. Instead, you want to like do
hopping and scan little pieces of
memory. If it's invalid, this chip's
memory controller seems to send back
dead beef. So, what you do is just in
case it's using paging. Unlikely, but
just in case, you do hex 1000 chunks of
memory. You skip forward hex 1000. Just
read four bytes and see did you get dead
beef or did you get anything other than
dead beef? And what you come up with
from that is you get some sort of memory
map. So cool. I now have a sense of like
what the ranges are. And the ranges make
sense according to my assembly which was
reaching out and trying to grab stuff in
the hex 80 something range.
That's the final thing. Can't dwell on
it. Don't have time rocking through
these 140 slides. But there is some
aliasing going on in there as well. So
now at this point I have scanned all of
the memory. I've figured out the memory
map. Now I can read all of the memory
that is within those valid memory
ranges. So I've got what I think is
probably the ROM at 8000000.
So I load the ROM into GEDA along with
all the existing firmware so that now
the existing firmware can reach out and
grab data from the thing that I think is
the ROM at hex 8000 x80.
Uh but there's still no strings. But
thankfully I'm an optimist and so I go
ahead and I use the GEDra manual search
for strings. you get all the normal sort
of garbage that you would expect. And
out of all the strings in the entire
thing, everything is garbage except for
like exactly 10 strings. But those 10
strings are super super useful because
for instance, it's saying something
about HCI commands, HCI events, LMP,
which is the packet data type that I
want to send later on. So cool, that is
super relevant to my interests. What do
you do when you have a useful string?
You go check the cross references. Where
is that string used? What code uses the
string HCI? Check the cross references.
Go there. And it's finally decompilation
time. The first and essentially only use
of these strings. There's two aliased
copies of this function. The only use of
these strings is essentially a single
function gets called over and over. It
gets called with those strings as one of
the parameters. It gets called with
another parameter that is unique to each
thing. So we might think there's maybe
some sort of registration going on where
it's saying like this thing gets
registered as index 3. This thing gets
indexed as register 7. And again it's
got all sorts of different data for
other parameters. So what do we do? Said
I'm looking for vendor specific
commands. How these sort of things work
on this system. So HCI command probably
is where I'm going to find vendor
specific commands. Go look at the data.
The data itself points here. Well that
data further points to some particular
function. And so we have to go skimming
along through the function. Now for the
interest of time, I can't show you the
nice animated version. So suffice to say
that if I just skim down through that
function which is pointed to by the
single function registration that
includes the string HCI command, there's
going to be a bunch of references to
data where it says this variable, is it
equal to three? Is it not equal to four?
Is it equal to 8? Is it not equal to 6?
And is it equal to 3F? And 3F is when
your lies light up and you say 3F,
that's the special magic vendor specific
op code group field. And indeed, if you
let the specification be your guide, you
will see that all the other op code
group fields for all the other v uh HCI
commands are in the range of 1 through 6
and 8. So all of these numbers that are
checking all sanity checks out 3 4 8 6.
These are numbers for upcode group
fields. These are numbers for HCI
commands. And so this thing right here
really looks like if it's using an op
code group 3f then call this function.
So that seems like that's probably the
process all the vendor specific commands
function. Drill down into that. Again
don't have time to show you the nice
form. So the quick form is yes there's
totally a bunch of those special magic
range values of FC something FD
something. We even got this FC20 that
FC, we said vendor specific command 20
was the like firmware download thing. So
I can drill into that specific function
if I want and really reverse engineer
how the firmware download works. But I
don't care about that because hold up,
what am I even trying to do here? Right?
Does anyone remember? Sorry, I don't
take questions. So what am I trying to
do? I'm trying to spoof the beady adder.
Right? So in reverse engineering, you
sometimes have to stop yourself from
getting lost in the weeds. you go deep,
but sometimes just stop, come up a level
and say, "What am I even doing again?"
Like, don't reverse engineer all of
this. Great. I've got ROM dumping. I've
got RAM dumping. I've got the capability
to go read a bunch of code. How about I
don't. Instead, what are my goals? I
want to spoof the BD header. Now, I know
a little bit about how config files are
being used, how vendor specific commands
are being used. I could drill into
vendor specific command 20, but instead
I go off a Google in again and I go to
GitHub and I search for things. And what
I find is there is some utilization of
the commands or sorry configuration
files. There's a function called get MAC
offset. So even the vendors called BD
adders MAC addresses sometimes. Get MAC
offset for this particular chip 8761B is
hex 30. So now I can put that together
with the leaked information about config
files and get my magic commands. So
basically some sort of special header,
some sort of total size length that's
nine for the rest of the bytes. 30 is
the offset where essentially this config
file is saying go to the beginning of
some sort of config stuff in memory. Go
to offset 30, plug in a BD adder, and
that's what we'll use for our custom BD
adder. Otherwise, they use one that's
flat uh burned into OTP. So cool. I've
got that. I just write it in a literal
text file. I reverse that text file to a
binary file. I compress that binary
file. I move the other file out of the
way. I copy it over to where it's
supposed to go. And boom. I've got a
custom beady adder. [gasps] Goal one
achieved. Hold your applause, please. We
have to keep going. On to goal two. So
cool. We can now spoof bi adders. We can
do we can say anyone who wants to use
WAD to go off and do machine in the
middle attacks against devices that
happen to be using public addresses,
feel free to. Now you know from those
previous slides how to configure the few
bytes in order to spoof your bead out.
So the stretch goal here was for
Bluetooth printing purposes. I wanted to
get rid of those brack dev boards and
move down to just a custom little
Bluetooth chip on a normal USB dongle.
So there's two ways I could go about
that. I already showed that I have the
ability to go reverse engineer all the
vendor specific commands, but I also
have memory read and memory write
capability. So which is the better way?
As I said, if you can not have to read
all the code, that would be the better
way. So I need to make some sort of
tool. My tool needs to speak over HCI.
It needs to send my packet data of what
I want to send later on. And then it
needs to reach somehow to the LMP layer,
the link manager protocol, Bluetooth
classic lowest layer, always baked into
the chip. And then that should send off
that packet data for me. That's the goal
here. Cool. Backing up a step, you know,
just want to say like I I hopefully
didn't miss the obvious when we look at
the, you know, leak documentation for
the RTL. um 8761B if we look at the
block diagrams there is no even JTAG or
debug or any sort of thing on the block
diagram and they could just be leaving
it off the block diagram but I don't
think they are because if you look at it
for other chips they put it on the
diagram so some other chip ARMbased chip
has S SWD so how are they debugging I
don't know I suspect via serial debug
basically like ser print print f
debugging I don't know but also we can
see if we look at the pin out for the
particular chip there are again no easy
obvious vious like there's the S SWD,
there's the TDIO, like there's no
obvious pins that are labeled according
to debug interfaces. So, I'm not
probably going to be able to get like a
hardware debug access. So, instead, I
need to figure out how their whole like
patching firmware update mechanism
works. And I'll tell you that there's
just generally two ways that people tend
to do this in a ecosystem like Bluetooth
where the majority of the code down at
the controller level, it's just baked
into the ROM. So you can either have
everything's in the ROM or maybe it's
booting off flash, but [snorts] it's
very common for it to all be in the ROM.
And so the problem is if you need to
patch the ROM somehow because you have,
you know, they're they're going to have
bugs. You need to patch the ROM somehow.
There's basically two approaches. The
first is to have something like patch
registers, patch RAM. These are sort of
architectural things baked into the
design of the chip where you can
essentially say like there's a big row
of registers that you put addresses
into. And as the CPU is executing code
and the program counter is going through
addresses, the hardware says, "Oh,
program counter equals that value from
that register. I need to redirect
somewhere else and run some other code."
So that's like sort of patch register
patch ramp. Maybe the other place is the
patch ram. The other way you can do it
is that you can sprinkle little if this
function pointer is not equal to null
call the function pointer sprinkle that
through your ROM and then update RAM
locations which are otherwise equal to
zero. So set if function pointer in RAM
not equal to zero then call the function
pointer. If not keep going. So I'll tell
you straight up it's using the if
function pointer not equal to null
version. The reason I can say this like
I didn't know this going in a priori and
I didn't really initially care super
much but it became obvious eventually
through just looking at enough code. You
can see that we have here things where
it says if code pointer pointer this
particular address not equal to code
pointer zero then go down here and
double dreference this code pointer
pointer and call it with a bunch of
parameters. And so that's just a
roundabout way of saying if the pointer
is not null call it as a function
pointer. So that's what it's doing. If
we went off and looked at this
particular address 8 009 whatever that
particular address has another
particular address that's why it's a
double pointer and that particular
address holds zeros by default anyways
and so you can think of it like how the
patching mechanism really works is that
they load some stuff into RAM the ROM
jumps to that stuff that stuff goes and
fills in a bunch of function pointers
anywhere that they want to sort of hook
the existing code execution and control
flow So literally it's architected for
dump some code on and hook the control
flow. Obviously I can use that to dump
some code on and hook the control flow.
Just a matter of figuring out how.
All right, not bad. So the suffering
truly begins 5 days from the CFP
deadline. So I have to back up for two
seconds to say that on the 18th, you
know, we come back here to the 7th, I
told some security researchers on a
Bluetooth private Slack that hey, we can
figure out the spoofing the be adder.
People don't need to use the CSR4
dongles anymore. Then Antonio Vasquez
Blanco, who's a Bluetooth security
researcher, on the 15th, he provided me
my memory dump script in his scape USB
Bluetooth library. So he had made a
library that talks USB Bluetooth and
then uses escape for packet crafting. So
he just said, "Hey, if you use this, you
can talk to a normal USB dongle instead
of your serial thing that you were
using." And so I thanked him for that. I
used it. And then on the 18th is where
the the story picks up. Then I went and
analyzed Bumble. Bumble is some Google
uh open- source code for doing
Bluetooth. And Bumble already had
support for doing patch download onto
realtech chips. they already had grabbed
the algorithm from the Linux code which
is open source and they had implemented
it themselves. So then I grabbed it from
their code and implemented myself in uh
the escape USB Bluetooth.
So the initial pock basically it
downloads my code into memory. It takes
the initial patches puts them into
memory with a little prologue hook at
the very very first function. And so the
idea is when the very first function is
called, it will jump down to my pot code
and it will jump back up and continue
execution in the normal code. And for
what it's worth, this is how I was
programming uh assembly at this point. I
went and I looked at the assembly
language. I would grab something like uh
hey, I need an or assembly instruction.
I'd grab that and then I would like
fiddle with those bits until I like
changed, you know, value one to value
two, you know, register one to register
two. So this is how I was writing my
six. uh MIF16E assembly at this point
just don't even I didn't even open the
manual yet I was just like take that
fiddle with the bits great good keep
going got 5 days to go but puck one
doesn't work after 4 hours suffering you
know debugging and eventually I decide
okay well I wrote my code into some
memory that I hope and I think is not
being used but that's not particularly
safe so instead let's like tack my code
on the end of the original patches same
idea and let's feed that in again
another 4 hours no But finally, you
know, 14 1/2 hours into the day at 9:00
p.m., I figure out there's a double D
reference that should only be a single D
reference, right? Writing assembly in
some unfamiliar language, doing it
wrong, suffering, but becoming more
strong for that. So, finally, PAC 2 is
working at the end of the day. Time to
hold off. We've only got 4 days to go.
What are we going to do? How are we
going to get arbitrary LMP packet going?
So, it's time to break out the big guns.
This is my brain food. Your brain runs
on glucose. When you need to get
anything done, you give it a boost.
Little little bit of sucrose like so. So
cool. Now I've got 4 days to the
deadline. I want to send LMP packets. I
want The thing about LMP packets is they
have to be sent in the context of an
active connection. It's not just like an
advertising packet. I don't know about
Wi-Fi from yesterday, but those
management frames I feel like management
frames just get to get sent around
without an active connection. We need to
create and establish a legitimate active
connection. Then we can send LMP
packets. That's where we're trying to
get here. And so Scapy USB Bluetooth is
really not meant for that. It's really
not particularly good at like create an
active connection. Now I've got like a
raw socket, but then I have to manage
all the state myself. Antonio helps me
out. He at least gets me to the point
where I can create a connection, send an
LMP name request using normal legitimate
ACI, not my custom crafted packets. And
then I go off and I try searching,
scraping through memory on the recipient
realtech dongle. So now I've got real
tech sender, real tech recipient. I can
scrape the memory on the real tech
recipient, but I can't find my packets
anywhere in memory. I just straight up
scrape memory. It's not there. And so
then I waste the rest of the day reverse
engineering LMP more because I've been
spending more time on HCI than LMP.
Cool. 3 days to go and uh you know 4
minutes to go. So basically uh at that
point it's worth saying that like
Bluetooth classic there's no good ways
to sniff the packets and so I have to
come up with my own way to sniff the
packet which is my two dongles one of
which now turns into a logging thing cuz
I don't trust that I'm sending packets
unless I can see it quote unquote over
the air. Well second best option is see
it on the recipient that it received the
actual packet. So around this time, for
what it's worth, had a little
conversation with Veronica where I said,
"Hey, I need to write a lot of code now.
It's time to start breaking out the myip
16 assembler." And she said, "You were
writing your code in hex? That's the
dumbest thing I've ever heard." And I
said, "Thanks, honey. That's going in
the slides."
All right. So, basically, suffering,
suffering, suffering. I'm not going to
dwell on the particular suffering.
Again, I don't want this to come off as
whiny, but the point is everywhere you
see suffering, you are also seeing me
leveling up in terms of myip skills and
my writing assembly in a weird
environment where I have to use like
memory dumping for debugging. Like I
don't want to say like you know
yesterday uh way he had like core dump
so he could see register values. I
didn't have register values. I have
memory dumps I have to put in assembly
to get register values. Whatever. Level
up, level up, level up. I now have
patched code inside of the Bluetooth
controller. I can use legitimate things
like remote name requests. So basically
when you get a name request from a
remote thing, it's supposed to take a
buffer of like 253 bytes and send it up
to the host. I'm using that now as my
LMP logging mechanism.
But at this point, my primary fuel is
exhausted. This is 2 days later, by the
way, that I made my way through that.
And it's time to switch to auxiliary
boosters because we got, you know, one
more day to go. suffering, suffering,
suffering, suffering, suffering. And
finally, a critical decision point 3.5
hours from the CFP deadline. Do I keep
coding up until the CFP deadline and
confirm that this all works or do I
actually like write up my CFP deadline?
Which do you think I did? Well, at this
point, I was zen because I knew that
this could work. I have this arbitrary
write capability, arbitrary read
capability. I am super confident that
I'm going to get arbitrary packet
sending capability. It's just going to
be slow and hella painful. So, my power
reserves uh are spent and it's time to
now go on intermission and go off and do
all the other stuff I've been putting
off. But, I put in my CFP uh submission.
As you may or may not know, sometimes
speakers don't actually have their full
stuff working before they submit a talk.
Pro tip right there. Anyways, later on,
come back, spin up, figure out that it
doesn't like the various hackish ways
that I'm logging information. That's
breaking connections. Switch to other
stuff. Switch to Bumble. Bumble is using
object-oriented programming. That's my
kryptonite. I can't handle abstraction
layers. And so I say, "Okay, Veronica,
you're going to read the code instead of
me. She's got a programmer mindset." But
then I have to create a special lab
setup for her to actually test my code
and read the Bumble code. That takes 2
days to set up. I give it to her. And
then an hour and a half after I give it
to her, I figure it out quote unquote
myself using GitHub Copilot and Chat
GPT. I finally figure out how to get
Bumble to send my vendor specific
commands.
And the final progress is on the 23rd, I
can now send an LMP packet using a
function that I see in the code to send
that exact packet. And then one little
bit more of suffering is that I finally
figure out how to send the actual
arbitrary LMP packet, which has six
arguments and you can only send four as
registers. So I have to learn about
their calling conventions and everything
else. And finally, boom, goal two. I've
completed the That's Sorry, don't clap.
No, no, no, no. And so, basically, CFP
deadline plus 2 days, two work days.
I've actually now got this arbitrary
capability to send a blob of data down
and get it sent out over the air. So, I
can get rid of Brack. This is not even
the final form. Uh, the dark firmware
real, which is what we're going to call
this, it takes a bunch more suffering to
get it working with Bluetooth printing.
Not going to care about that point. But
the nice takeaway from that is that
forced me to turn it into the standalone
file which gives you the magic commands
where you just get to now overwrite a
file instead of doing dynamic download.
Just take a file, stick it on the file
system, and you get to put the custom
firmware onto the real tech chips. And
now Kazam, these things are now able to
send stuff they're not supposed to. So
taking a step back, I'm going to leave
this for future Bluetooth researchers to
read. Like to do better work in the
Bluetooth space, we need people not just
saying there exists a vendor specific
command. you need to actually document
the parameters of the command. For this
particular audience, I'll say it would
be super cool if anyone else wants to
like go off and try to do the exact same
thing in terms of ROM recovery using
your particular techniques like fault
injection or optical analysis and then
like contribute that to open security
training. We can have students do it the
Zeno way and the U way. But yeah, the
final one last thing here is that it
turned out that realtech was really nice
and this was suspicious to me. So
essentially, I got them to get give me
the hardware setup con configuration.
They asked me what I was up to. I told
them Bluetooth printing. I thought they
were going to stop talking to me at that
point and instead they turned around and
said, "Hey, if this is what you're
trying to do, we could make you an
official way to send an arbitrary packet
of LMP and LLCP." I said like, "Hell's
yes, I'll take it." So, they told me
they're not going to do it for the RTL
8761B, but rather the C, the upcoming
chip, the chip that they want other
people to move to. They sent me a dev
board. I ran their magic commands with
their custom firmware. So, they
literally have this firmware written
here in time for hardware.io. And so,
it's documented. I got them to take the
real tech proprietary off of that and
just say realtech uh copyright. So, like
officially, they're going to have a
documented way for you to send arbitrary
commands. don't have to rely on my
hackish firmware. That is a bestcase
outcome scenario here. I'm not going to
do a great job of maintaining it. So,
the future looks bright. We're
essentially having a vendor stepping up
and saying, "We will give you the
capabilities you need to send arbitrary
packets for doing fuzzing, for doing
vulnerability hunting, and I hope other
people follow their lead." That's it.
The code is already open source and
released. The code, the geer files,
everything is released. And uh thanks to
Veronica for making Gedra scripts.
Thanks to Antonio for helping me with an
updated memory dump. So I don't have any
further time to take questions. I'm
going to watch the next talk. So don't
come up to me and ask me questions. You
can find me over in the coffee area
after the next talk, the coffee break.
Thank you for your time.
[applause]
Wow.
That was a sprint. Um, despite saying
that he doesn't take questions, maybe we
can ask one.
>> Does anybody have a question?
>> What do you got?
>> Come at me. Stump the chump.
>> Anyone who is capable to following that?
All right, we've got one.
>> Uh, so when you were trying to execute
um your own instruction from RAM, uh, I
noticed that one of the last slides you
added an epilogue at the bottom. So you
were jumping from the end of RAM. What
was the reason for that?
>> Yeah. So unfortunately like I had to cut
so many slides that I can't tell you but
he did correctly notice that my previous
thing said I was hooking function
prologs and eventually it said hooking
function epilog. The answer turned out
to be that the existing patch code would
insert its patches. And so earlier when
I hooked function prologues and I put my
patches in, it would stomp my patches.
So I need to like wait for them to put
their patches and then I stomp their
patches instead of them stomping my
patches. But still I obviously have to
call through to their original function
pointer to make sure everything still
works. Yep.
>> Thank you so much. Let's give a round of
applause to the person who managed to
follow the entire talk of Zena.